Hi.

I'm Paulo. I was born here, in 1986, and what was happening in 1986?

1 - The Halley comet
2 - MIR
3 - Top Gun

And this is the TIOBE index measuring programming language popularity in 1986.
Well, C is at the top, as expected, Ada is second, and Lisp is third.

So Lisp is old. So what? Old is bad, new is better. Pff
Turns out that things don't work like that in Computer Science.
Most of the ideas that we use today are from the 1940s

But this is a consequence of a very good story
---

This is David Hilbert. He was a German mathematician, and one of the best, ever.

He wanted an algorithm that, given a statement in formal logic, would determine if that statement was true or false.
This was called "The Decision Problem", or the Entscheidungsproblem, because it sounds better in German
But what Hilbert was depending on is actually a very logical proposition (pun intended)

He was depending that every provable statement is true and that every non provable statement is false.
Or to put in a better way, he was depending on the fact that logic is complete.

He used to say that "There is no such thing as an unsolvable problem", and he believed that so much
that the epitath on his grave is:

Wir müssen wissen.
Wir werden wissen.

We must know.
We will know.

---

In 1930's, Kurt Godel published a proof of his incompleteness theorem.

What Godel showed is that any system powerful enough to express arithmetic is either incomplete or inconsistent

How did he do that? He used a clever system that encodes proofs and statements and proofs as numbers.
And he used that to encode the following statement

"This statement is not provable"


Ai ai ai.

Is this true or false?

If it's false, then it is provable and we just proved something that is false and the universe imploded
If it's true, but now you have a statement that is true, but you cannot prove it. Which is really sad for a mathematician

----
Ok, so where do we go from here?

Now you have a problem in your hands, how do you show that the Entscheidungsproblem is undecidable?
You need a formal definition of "decidable" (or computable) before you can proof what is decidable or not.

So Alonzo Church derived one using Lambda calculus showed that
If computability is something that you can express using Lambda Calculus, then yes, the Entscheidungsproblem
is in fact undecidable.

Godel actually didn't like Church's proof and did his own
He mentioned that Church's proof was "unsatisfactory"
(Bender gif)


So Godel came up with his own definition of computability
Godel solution was called "General recursive functions of natural numbers"
Church also showed that both definitions were equivalent, which is called the Church Thesis of Equivalence.


Also, one briliant youg man called Alan Turing came up with his own idea
of computability

He came up with the concept of Turing machines. On his paper he showed that
if your definition of algorithm is a turing machine then yes, the Entscheidungsproblem
is in fact undecidable.


And in just one year, we had three definitions of computability

Alonzo Church: Lambda Calculus
An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory
Bulletin the American Mathematical Society, May 1935


Kurt Godel: Recursive Functions
Stephen Kleene, General recursive functions of natural numbers
Bulletin the American Mathematical Society, July 1935


Alan M Turing: Turing Machines
On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, received 25 May 1936



This is a clear indication that this mathematics was not invented, but discovered

----

Lambda calculus is an amazing piece of mathematics. It's simple at it's heart
and can be used to build complex systems

It only has three constructs

```
L, M, N :=   x
        |    (lambda x. N)
        |    (L M)

```

Variables, function definitions and function application.

There are no other constructs than these three that I showed you.
So there are no booleans
No integers
No if
No else
No while

How do we build a programming language like that?
Let's start with booleans

Booleans are only used to make a choice, but we can make decisions without booleans.
Let's define two functions (true and false), they will make decisions between two things, so let's
pass two things as parameters (x and y).
Now true will make the first choice (x) and false will choose the second one (y)

```
true x y =
     x

false x y =
     y

```

Let's define `if then else` using our booleans

```
ifte bool t e =
     bool t e

```

Easy, we just take a boolean, the `then` branch and the `else` branch and it just calls the boolean function

So what about the `and` function? Can we express it a la 1940s?

```
and p q =
    p q p

and true false =
    true false true

```

What about or?

```
or p q =
   p p q

or true false =
   true true false

```

Unfortunately we don't have time to show all the possibilities, but please try it yourself.
Nice, this way we can also build `not` and `xor` and have all the basic blocks for any computation.

-----------

Oh, numbers. I almost forgot about them.
How do we encode numbers?

What if we define numbers as the following: The number of times we apply a function to an argument?

```

two f x = f ( f x )
one f x = f x
zero f x = x

```

So for every positive integer, I can represent it with a function.
But wait, how the hell can I use this?

```
> two (+1) 0
2

```

We have to remind ourselves that the representation of a number is not the number per se,
Just like the same "thing" can be expressed with differnet words in differnt languages,
we can express numbers/booleans in different ways in different programming languages

---

Adition?


add m n f x = m f (n f x)

---

We take two numbers, (m and n), I apply f `n` times and then `m` times

And that's it, we have adition, for that on, multiplication is easy

```

mul m n f x = m (n f) x

```

What?

---

Well, you can think this as loop. The `m` is the outer loop, and for each iteration of that loop you have an inner loop `n`

--- 

Ok, this is all very nice. But this is the 1940s, we had no way of runnings this language.
Until this man came along

This is John McCarthy, and he developed the first implementation of a functional language called LISP

(Lisp implementation example)

Fun fact, Lisp was not based on Lambda Calculus, altought it has the reserved word LAMBDA on it.
John McCarthy used the theorical model of recursive functions on the paper from Godel and his doctoral student Kleenee


---

From them on, lots of functional programming languages appeared and disapared.

Most people working on functional programming were working in universities,
isolated from each other, again remember this is between 1960 and 1990s
Colaboration was hard, and most researches were writing and rewriting compilers 

Until a man called Paul Hudak from Yale University realized that
all of these researches were working with more or less the same programming language
but they could not share any code because everyone had a different compiler.

So a committee was formed, and they most of the principles of the language were based on
lambda calculus and combinatorial logics.
One of the experts in those fields was Haskell Curry, a student from David Hilbert. So
they decide to pay a tribute to Haskell Curry and name their language:

Curry

(picture of a curry)

Yes, for one day the Haskell language was named Curry. But they decided to change to Haskell the next day

(picture of haskell logo)

This was around 1987

---

A very important consequence of functional programming that I want to talk
about is Lazy evaluation.

It means that the value that you apply your function, can be infinite

----

Here we can take 20 elements of the inifite list of natural numbers

----

Or we can map a function over the infinite list, and only take the ones we want

---

When I'm saying that the list is infinite, it doesn't mean that the functions
are going to be applied for every element of the list,
it just means that the decision of the elements which will be applied is
to the consumer.

---

Can we use this power to express UI events?

How would it look like?

---

We need two things

1 - Infinite list of events

2 - Define functions to be applied to those events

3 - Result is an infinite list of side effects

---

We can express that very nicely in language like Elm

If we have a Signal, which can be interpreted as an infinite stream
we can lift a function (isConsonant) to work on the Signal,
and return another signal


---

For state handling, we can call `foldp`, which can be read as
fold from the past.

So we have our initial state zero here, a function to manipulate that
state and return a new state, and a signal of events

----

Ok, to be fair, this is not necessarly true since the latest version of Elm
0.17.


Signals have been replaced by subscriptions, but all the anologies still hold

---

These are the subscriptions of a game that I wrote in Elm

Here we are subscribing to 5 different event streams.
One for the frame animation, key events, two time events and a websocket

You can see those declarations as signals and functions to apply on those signals

So on the signal which will emit an event every second, we are going to execute the function `AskForTopPlayers`

Or on the signal with events coming every two seconds, we're going to execute the funciton GeneratePipe

---

In Elm's architecture, subscriptions now generate messages
Messages are how changes are propagate throught the system

Users can generate messages, like clicks, drags and submits
Sockets generate messages, like pulls and pushes

So we need to handle messages, and return a new state

---

Elm's update function does that,
it takes a Message, a state (game) and returns a new state and a new message
State Monad!

---

We also need a function to take the new state, and generate html from it

That's the view function!


Here we have a view function, that takes a game
And return a div, with a list of empty attributes
and a list of children,

The only child is a text that is the string representation of the game

---

I've been learning Elm for a little while,
and I always thought:

What is the most reactive, user interactive thing you can do?
A game!

So I built one, in Elm
It's a flappy bird clone, you can play it too
It has a live score for the first three players

---

Summary:

* Functional Programming: It's discovered
* Are you using a programming language that was discovered or invented?
* I invite everyone to use programming languages that were discovered

---



---

Feedback:

what can we expect? on the introduction

---
